Towards the end of 1987, Apple introduced a package titled Apple Macintosh System Software Update 5.0. For the first time, the Macintosh operating system was offered as a distinct retail product that included four 800K disks and three manuals, at a cost of $49 USD. The software itself was still freely available through user groups and bulletin board services. While the product box presented this update to the operating system as "version 5.0", this number did not appear in the software itself. Three of the four disks (System Tools 1, System Tools 2 and Utilities 1) are all bootable, and the user could boot off of whichever floppy contained the tools the user needed. For instance, System Tools 2 is the only disk with printer drivers, and Utilities 1 is the only disk with Disk First Aid and Apple HD SC Setup. Because the disks were named System Tools, users and the press commonly referred to this version as System Tools 5.0.

The primary new feature of System 5 is MultiFinder, an extension which lets the system run several programs at once. The system uses a cooperative multitasking model, meaning that time was given to the background applications only when the running application yielded control. A change in system functions that applications were already calling to handle events makes many existing applications share time automatically, as well as be able to perform tasks in the background. Users can also choose not to use MultiFinder, thereby sticking with using a single application at a time.

System Software 5 was available for a very short time and only in some countries, including the United States, Canada and some European countries.
